DesignPrinciples.md, before:

# Design Principles: Functional Programming in C#

## Core Philosophy
### Predictability Over Cleverness
The primary goal is writing code that behaves predictably. When you call a function with specific inputs, you should know exactly what will happen—no surprises, no hidden state changes, no mysterious side effects.

### Honest Function Signatures
A function's signature should be a contract that tells the complete truth:
- If it returns `int`, it returns an integer—not sometimes null, not sometimes throws.
- If it can fail, that should be in the return type (`Result<T, TError>`).
- If a value might be missing, use `Option<T>` instead of null.

### Immutability by Default
Treat mutability as a last resort optimization, not the default. Immutable code is thread-safe without locks, easier to reason about, and impossible to corrupt through aliasing.

---
## Refactoring Strategies

### 1. Making Code Immutable
#### Start Small with `readonly`
```csharp
// Mutable - can be changed after creation
public class Account
{
	public decimal Balance { get; set; }
	public string Owner { get; set; }
}

// Immutable - properties cannot change
public class Account
{
	public decimal Balance { get; }
	public string Owner { get; }

	public Account(decimal balance, string owner)
	{
		Balance = balance;
		Owner = owner;
	}
}
```

#### Use "With" Methods for Updates
```csharp
public class Account
{
	public decimal Balance { get; }
	public string Owner { get; }

	public Account WithBalance(decimal newBalance) =>
		new Account(newBalance, Owner);

	public Account Deposit(decimal amount) =>
		WithBalance(Balance + amount);
}
```

#### Leverage C# Records
```csharp
public record Account(decimal Balance, string Owner)
{
	public Account Deposit(decimal amount) =>
		this with { Balance = Balance + amount };
}
```

#### Immutable Collections
```csharp
// Mutable collection - can be modified by anyone with a reference
List<Transaction> transactions = new();

// Immutable - operations return new collections
ImmutableList<Transaction> transactions = ImmutableList<Transaction>.Empty;
transactions = transactions.Add(newTransaction); // Returns new list
```

---

### 2. Replacing Exceptions with Result Types

#### The Problem with Exceptions
```csharp
// Exceptions hide failure modes
public int Divide(int numerator, int denominator)
{
	if (denominator == 0)
		throw new DivideByZeroException();
	return numerator / denominator;
}

var result = Divide(10, userInput); // Runtime explosion possible
```

#### The Result Pattern
```csharp
public Result<int, string> Divide(int numerator, int denominator)
{
	if (denominator == 0)
		return Result<int, string>.Failure("Cannot divide by zero");

	return Result<int, string>.Success(numerator / denominator);
}

var result = Divide(10, userInput)
	.Match(
		success: value => $"Result: {value}",
		failure: error => $"Error: {error}"
	);
```

#### When to Use Exceptions vs Results
- Use exceptions for programming errors (null arguments, index out of range).
- Use results for expected failures (validation, parsing, business rules).

---

### 3. Eliminating Primitive Obsession with Value Objects

#### The Problem
```csharp
public class User
{
	public string Email { get; set; }
	public decimal AccountBalance { get; set; }
	public int Age { get; set; }
}

public void SendEmail(string email, string subject, string body)
{
	// Is 'email' valid? Hard to know without repeating validation.
}
```

#### The Solution: Value Objects
```csharp
public record EmailAddress
{
	public string Value { get; }

	private EmailAddress(string value) => Value = value;

	public static Result<EmailAddress, string> Create(string input)
	{
		if (string.IsNullOrWhiteSpace(input))
			return Result<EmailAddress, string>.Failure("Email cannot be empty");

		if (!input.Contains("@"))
			return Result<EmailAddress, string>.Failure("Invalid email format");

		return Result<EmailAddress, string>.Success(new EmailAddress(input));
	}
}

public record Age
{
	public int Value { get; }

	private Age(int value) => Value = value;

	public static Result<Age, string> Create(int input)
	{
		if (input < 0 || input > 150)
			return Result<Age, string>.Failure("Age must be between 0 and 150");

		return Result<Age, string>.Success(new Age(input));
	}
}

public void SendEmail(EmailAddress to, Subject subject, Body body)
{
	// 'to' is guaranteed to be valid.
}
```

---

### 4. Handling Missing Values with Option/Maybe

#### The Null Problem
```csharp
public User FindUser(int id)
{
	return database.Users.FirstOrDefault(u => u.Id == id); // Might return null
}

var user = FindUser(123);
Console.WriteLine(user.Name); // Possible null reference
```

#### The Option Solution
```csharp
public Option<User> FindUser(int id)
{
	var user = database.Users.FirstOrDefault(u => u.Id == id);
	return user != null
		? Option<User>.Some(user)
		: Option<User>.None();
}

var message = FindUser(123)
	.Map(u => u.Name)
	.Match(
		some: name => $"Hello, {name}!",
		none: () => "User not found"
	);
```

---

### 5. Composing Operations with Railway-Oriented Programming

#### Chaining Operations That Can Fail
```csharp
public Result<Order, string> ProcessOrder(string userEmail, string productId, int quantity)
{
	return EmailAddress.Create(userEmail)
		.Bind(email => FindUser(email))
		.Bind(user => FindProduct(productId)
			.Bind(product => CheckStock(product, quantity)
				.Bind(stock => CreateOrder(user, product, quantity))));
}
```

#### Combining Validations
```csharp
public static class Validator
{
	public static Func<T, Result<T, string>> All<T>(params Func<T, Result<T, string>>[] validators)
	{
		return input =>
		{
			foreach (var validator in validators)
			{
				var result = validator(input);
				if (!result.IsSuccess)
					return result;
			}

			return Result<T, string>.Success(input);
		};
	}
}

var validateUser = Validator.All<User>(
	ValidateAge,
	ValidateEmail,
	ValidateName
);
```

---

## Best Practices Summary

### Do
- Make illegal states unrepresentable through types.
- Use immutable data structures by default.
- Return explicit error types instead of throwing exceptions.
- Validate data at system boundaries.
- Compose small, pure functions into larger operations.

### Do Not
- Use null to represent missing values (use `Option<T>`).
- Throw exceptions for expected failures (use `Result<T, TError>`).
- Mutate state unless absolutely necessary for performance.
- Use primitive types for domain concepts (create value objects).
- Hide side effects in functions that appear pure.

### Remember
The goal is to be practical. Use these patterns where they make code clearer, safer, and more maintainable. C# is a multi-paradigm language—choose the approach that best fits the problem.

Commit message:

Add railway-oriented programming section to Design Principles document, detailing workflow visualization, Result type, and usage guidelines.

DesignPrinciples.md, after:

# Design Principles: Functional Programming in C#

## Core Philosophy
### Predictability Over Cleverness
The primary goal is writing code that behaves predictably. When you call a function with specific inputs, you should know exactly what will happen—no surprises, no hidden state changes, no mysterious side effects.

### Honest Function Signatures
A function's signature should be a contract that tells the complete truth:
- If it returns `int`, it returns an integer—not sometimes null, not sometimes throws.
- If it can fail, that should be in the return type (`Result<T, TError>`).
- If a value might be missing, use `Option<T>` instead of null.

### Immutability by Default
Treat mutability as a last resort optimization, not the default. Immutable code is thread-safe without locks, easier to reason about, and impossible to corrupt through aliasing.

---
## Refactoring Strategies

### 1. Making Code Immutable
#### Start Small with `readonly`
```csharp
// Mutable - can be changed after creation
public class Account
{
	public decimal Balance { get; set; }
	public string Owner { get; set; }
}

// Immutable - properties cannot change
public class Account
{
	public decimal Balance { get; }
	public string Owner { get; }

	public Account(decimal balance, string owner)
	{
		Balance = balance;
		Owner = owner;
	}
}
```

#### Use "With" Methods for Updates
```csharp
public class Account
{
	public decimal Balance { get; }
	public string Owner { get; }

	public Account WithBalance(decimal newBalance) =>
		new Account(newBalance, Owner);

	public Account Deposit(decimal amount) =>
		WithBalance(Balance + amount);
}
```

#### Leverage C# Records
```csharp
public record Account(decimal Balance, string Owner)
{
	public Account Deposit(decimal amount) =>
		this with { Balance = Balance + amount };
}
```

#### Immutable Collections
```csharp
// Mutable collection - can be modified by anyone with a reference
List<Transaction> transactions = new();

// Immutable - operations return new collections
ImmutableList<Transaction> transactions = ImmutableList<Transaction>.Empty;
transactions = transactions.Add(newTransaction); // Returns new list
```

---

### 2. Replacing Exceptions with Result Types

#### The Problem with Exceptions
```csharp
// Exceptions hide failure modes
public int Divide(int numerator, int denominator)
{
	if (denominator == 0)
		throw new DivideByZeroException();
	return numerator / denominator;
}

var result = Divide(10, userInput); // Runtime explosion possible
```

#### The Result Pattern
```csharp
public Result<int, string> Divide(int numerator, int denominator)
{
	if (denominator == 0)
		return Result<int, string>.Failure("Cannot divide by zero");

	return Result<int, string>.Success(numerator / denominator);
}

var result = Divide(10, userInput)
	.Match(
		success: value => $"Result: {value}",
		failure: error => $"Error: {error}"
	);
```

#### When to Use Exceptions vs Results
- Use exceptions for programming errors (null arguments, index out of range).
- Use results for expected failures (validation, parsing, business rules).

---

### 3. Eliminating Primitive Obsession with Value Objects

#### The Problem
```csharp
public class User
{
	public string Email { get; set; }
	public decimal AccountBalance { get; set; }
	public int Age { get; set; }
}

public void SendEmail(string email, string subject, string body)
{
	// Is 'email' valid? Hard to know without repeating validation.
}
```

#### The Solution: Value Objects
```csharp
public record EmailAddress
{
	public string Value { get; }

	private EmailAddress(string value) => Value = value;

	public static Result<EmailAddress, string> Create(string input)
	{
		if (string.IsNullOrWhiteSpace(input))
			return Result<EmailAddress, string>.Failure("Email cannot be empty");

		if (!input.Contains("@"))
			return Result<EmailAddress, string>.Failure("Invalid email format");

		return Result<EmailAddress, string>.Success(new EmailAddress(input));
	}
}

public record Age
{
	public int Value { get; }

	private Age(int value) => Value = value;

	public static Result<Age, string> Create(int input)
	{
		if (input < 0 || input > 150)
			return Result<Age, string>.Failure("Age must be between 0 and 150");

		return Result<Age, string>.Success(new Age(input));
	}
}

public void SendEmail(EmailAddress to, Subject subject, Body body)
{
	// 'to' is guaranteed to be valid.
}
```

---

### 4. Handling Missing Values with Option/Maybe

#### The Null Problem
```csharp
public User FindUser(int id)
{
	return database.Users.FirstOrDefault(u => u.Id == id); // Might return null
}

var user = FindUser(123);
Console.WriteLine(user.Name); // Possible null reference
```

#### The Option Solution
```csharp
public Option<User> FindUser(int id)
{
	var user = database.Users.FirstOrDefault(u => u.Id == id);
	return user != null
		? Option<User>.Some(user)
		: Option<User>.None();
}

var message = FindUser(123)
	.Map(u => u.Name)
	.Match(
		some: name => $"Hello, {name}!",
		none: () => "User not found"
	);
```

---

### 5. Composing Operations with Railway-Oriented Programming

Railway-oriented programming (ROP) visualizes a workflow as two parallel tracks: a success track and an error track. Each operation receives a value from the success track and returns either another success value (stay on track) or an error (switch to the failure track). Once the flow moves to the failure track it skips any remaining steps and carries the first error to the end. This approach keeps the happy path linear and keeps error handling explicit without piles of nested `if` statements or try/catch blocks.

#### The `Result` Type and `Bind`
At the heart of ROP is a `Result<TSuccess, TError>` type with a `Bind` method. `Bind` only executes the next function when the current result represents success; otherwise it propagates the existing error. That behavior gives you automatic short-circuiting and keeps business logic focused on successful operations.

#### Chaining Operations That Can Fail
```csharp
public Result<Order, string> ProcessOrder(string userEmail, string productId, int quantity)
{
	return EmailAddress.Create(userEmail)
		.Bind(email => FindUser(email))
		.Bind(user => FindProduct(productId)
			.Bind(product => CheckStock(product, quantity)
				.Bind(stock => CreateOrder(user, product, quantity))));
}
```

The pipeline reads top to bottom just like a specification: validate the email, load the user, fetch the product, check stock, create the order. If any step fails the chain jumps to the failure track and the remaining functions are skipped.

#### Combining Validations
```csharp
public static class Validator
{
	public static Func<T, Result<T, string>> All<T>(params Func<T, Result<T, string>>[] validators)
	{
		return input =>
		{
			foreach (var validator in validators)
			{
				var result = validator(input);
				if (!result.IsSuccess)
					return result;
			}

			return Result<T, string>.Success(input);
		};
	}
}

var validateUser = Validator.All<User>(
	ValidateAge,
	ValidateEmail,
	ValidateName
);
```

#### When to Reach for ROP
- Workflows with several sequential operations that may fail.
- Validation pipelines where the first failure should stop processing.
- Scenarios where you want to keep the success path uncluttered by error checks.

#### When Not to Use It
- Tiny operations with no branching or only one possible failure mode.
- Situations where you must collect all errors instead of stopping at the first failure.
- Ultra low-level code where wrapping everything in result objects would add too much overhead.

ROP is most effective when combined with honest function signatures: returning `Result` and `Option` types makes it obvious that a function participates in a railway flow and makes the happy path comfortable to read.

---

## Best Practices Summary

### Do
- Make illegal states unrepresentable through types.
- Use immutable data structures by default.
- Return explicit error types instead of throwing exceptions.
- Validate data at system boundaries.
- Compose small, pure functions into larger operations.

### Do Not
- Use null to represent missing values (use `Option<T>`).
- Throw exceptions for expected failures (use `Result<T, TError>`).
- Mutate state unless absolutely necessary for performance.
- Use primitive types for domain concepts (create value objects).
- Hide side effects in functions that appear pure.

### Remember
The goal is to be practical. Use these patterns where they make code clearer, safer, and more maintainable. C# is a multi-paradigm language—choose the approach that best fits the problem.
